	Spam is a pesky problem that has plagued our inboxes since the advent of email.  
As the level of sophistication spammers have used to evade spam filters and into 
users’ mailboxes has increased, the spam-fighting community has constantly strived 
to stay two steps ahead. More recently, emails containing HTML attachments that 
redirect to malicious web content, attempting to infiltrate the user’s computer 
system and gain access to sensitive personal information, have become a widespread 
spam technique. This paper examines the ongoing battle to protect users from 
unsolicited bulk email and the ethical implications for computing professionals, 
particularly their role in advancing the technology that facilitates ever-more 
sophisticated spam techniques.  

	Studies have reported that the magnitude of spam has increased dramatically 
over the years, from approximately 10% of overall mail volume in 1998 to 80% in 
2006 (Messaging Anti-Abuse Working Group 2006 cited Goodman, Cormack & Heckerman 
2007:25). In fact, some large email service providers like Hotmail can receive 
more than a billion spam messages per day (Goodman, Cormack & Heckerman 2007:26). 
While only a small fraction of that 80% actually reaches end users due to effective 
spam filtering-software, the problem of spam (and its associated scams) remains a 
serious one and cannot be ignored.

	One particular method used to aggressively attack a user’s email system is via 
HTML attachments, as Constantin (2010) highlights. These attachments redirect to 
multiple ‘scareware’ websites and eventually display a fake antivirus scan. The user 
is then warned that malware was found on their computer, after which a rogue program
is encouraged for download and installation. However, this program does nothing but 
bombard the computer with security alerts involving fictitious infections.  By way of 
fear, users are scammed into paying a license fee for an utterly useless application. 

	Data from security vendor Sophos (cited in Constantin 2010b) suggests the volume 
of spam with an HTML attachment surged to 8% of total junk mail traffic in 2010, with 
the majority of malicious content consisting of phishing pages. ‘Phishing’ is described 
as a particularly insidious type of spam where legitimate businesses are impersonated 
with the intent to steal passwords, credit card numbers, Social Security numbers and 
other sensitive information (Goodman, Cormack & Heckerman (2007:29). Clearly, this 
poses some interesting and contentious issues including financial, legal and ethical 
concerns.

	Traditionally, phishing attacks tend to target customers of organisations such 
as banks, social networking websites, online auction sites such as eBay and payment 
processing services like PayPal. So not only are spam victims susceptible to con-
siderable financial losses but they are also vulnerable to identity theft, which 
may lead to even worse consequences from a legal standpoint. Given the push for 
global cohesion in legislating against cybercrime today (Redford 2011:34) users 
face the growing possibility of being implicated in criminal activity as a result 
of spam.

	One example is by ‘mule recruitment’ where criminals send out millions of 
fraudulent job and employment offers to random email addresses, hoping to recruit 
unsuspecting and innocent ‘mules’. Mules then receive stolen funds using their bank 
account, which they subsequently transfer to criminals overseas. In Australia, people 
who agree to participate in such ‘jobs’ may be prosecuted (Australian Federal Police 
2012).  

	So given what we know about the evils of spam, it begs the question, “Can legis-
lative attempts to effectively stop spam ever succeed, and if not, what ultimately 
will?” In the United States, the 2003 CAN-SPAM Act (Controlling the Assault of Non-
Solicited Pornography and Marketing Act) enjoyed only limited success (Grimes 2007 
cited in Goodman, Cormack & Heckerman 2007:32), with the level of sophistication 
that spammers now use making it difficult for them to be tracked them down. Marchant 
(n.d) also suggests that any legislation aimed at regulating Internet content will 
undoubtedly run into free speech and privacy challenges. Due to these legal short-
comings, technology will remain the most powerful tool in the fight against spam.

	However, as anti-spam methods improve in line with emerging technologies, spammers 
actively adapt and devise even more sophisticated ways to circumvent the innovative 
solutions already in place. A cycle of attack and counter-attack therefore develops, 
leading to endless escalations and a tit-for-tat battle to protect the inbox from harm 
(Goodman, Cormack & Heckerman 2007).  

	Mills (2011) explores the recent trend of HTML files embedded in emails, and the 
implications for anti-spam researchers and developers. Because browsers like Chrome 
and Firefox are able to detect phishing sites quite well, phishers have responded with 
even cleverer ways of evading browser blacklists. One such tactic involves filling out 
personal information on an HTML form and after the user clicks “submit”, the data is 
sent through a POST request to a PHP script hosted on a legitimate Web server that has 
been compromised. The level of technical complexity involved makes such techniques 
difficult to detect, and thus can avoid triggering a warning from the browser. As 
months-old phishing campaigns go undetected, email service providers can only issue 
warnings to their customers about opening HTML attachments from suspicious emails 
and providing sensitive information in web forms. Until an even more complex 
countermeasure is developed, of course!  

	Response times will depend naturally on the severity of the email threat but given 
the rapid rates at which technology seems to be evolving, are computing professionals 
doing more harm than good by providing the landscape for spammers, phishers, spoofers 
and click-frauders? To what extent should technology play in combatting cybercrime and 
capturing cybercriminals? Can end-user education, if administered properly, ever suffice 
in controlling online abuse? Or is there a legitimate case for endeavours such as the 
Spamhaus Project and Scambusters.org that appear to have taken on the roles of scam 
‘police’ and ‘watchdogs’. These are all important ethical considerations that must come 
into play when tackling issues like spam or other computer-related problems.
 
 
References:
Australian Federal Police, ‘Internet fraud and scams’, retrieved 16 April 2012 from 
	http://www.afp.gov.au/policing/cybercrime/internet-fraud-and-scams.aspx

Constantin, L. 2010, ‘Aggressive Scam Campaign with HTML Attachments Leads to Scareware’, 
	retrieved 27 April 2012 from 
	http://news.softpedia.com/news/Aggressive-Spam-Campaign-with-HTML-Attachments-Leads-
	to-Scareware-156921.shtml

Constantin, L. 2010a, ‘HTML Attachment Spam Exploded in Recent Months’, retrieved 
	27 April 2012 from 
	http://news.softpedia.com/news/HTML-Attachment-Spam-Exploded-in-Recent-Months-
	159367.shtml
	
Goodman, J., Cormack G.V. & Heckerman D. 2007, ‘Spam and the Ongoing Battle for the 
	Inbox’, Communications of the ACM, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 25-33. Retrieved 16 April 
	2012 from ACM Digital Library: Association for Computer Machinery database
	
Marchant, A., ‘Part of The Picture: Ethics and Issues’, retrieved 12 April 2012 from 
	http://cs.calvin.edu/activities/books/c++/intro/3e/WebItems/Ch01-Web/POP-EthicsAnd
	Issues.pdf
	
Mills, E. 2011, ‘Phishers Use HTML Attachments to Evade Browser Blacklists’, retrieved 
	28 April 2012 from
	http://news.cnet.com/8301-27080_3-20043960-245.html

Redford, M. 2011, ‘U.S. and EU Legislation on Cybercrime’, 2011 European Intelligence 
	and Security Informatics Conference, pp. 34-37. Retrieved 24 April 2012 from IEEE 
	Explore database
	
Scambusters.org, ‘Internet Scams, Identity Theft, and Urban Legends: Are You at Risk?’, 
	retrieved 12 April 2012 from 
	http://scambusters.org
	
The Spamhaus project, ‘The Definition of Spam’, retrieved 12 April 2012 from 
	http://www.spamhaus.org/consumer/definition

